Now that you're familiar with the Wordpress press dashboard Let's take a look at how themes work with
Wordpress and how we can use them to customize the look of our site and create a great looking Web site
very quickly.
So like with the plugin ecosystem WordPress has a huge theme ecosystem which we can see at Wordpress
dot org slash themes.
Now all of the themes on WordPress org are completely free.
So any of these we can recreate with the touch of a button we can also look at the most popular themes
to get an idea.
Of what some of the best themes might be and we can search by filter as well so we can look for specific
color schemes specific layouts specific features or subjects or even just search for a general topic.
So for example we were looking for a business theme that we could search for those and add whichever
one we like the look of we can do that within WordPress itself.
So anything that we find on here we can search for within WordPress.
So to add a new theme we click Add in the Word Press appearance themes section and then we get all of
the search options that we just saw on wordpress to the org and we get a bunch of the most popular themes
as well.
I'm going to for the moment choose Zera light and we'll just see how we can customize this particular
theme as an example.
So just like with plugins and updates we can install themes without having to download any files.
We can just click activate them and then that will make the theme happen.
We can use live preview if you want to see what it looks like we're actually making it live.
But as we're just developing we might as well go for the whole thing.
So you can see that that's changed the look of our site but it hasn't changed the content already though.
I think it looks a lot nicer.
So once you've chosen your theme it's time to get to work.
Customizing it.
So this particular theme has a get started link which has an F FAA cue about how to do various things
which is one of the things I like about it.
Some themes will have this some won't.
But it also has some actions required to set it up.
So let's follow those steps.
So first off a flight like a lot of things come comes with a home page template.
But to see that we need to change the reading settings to your latest posts.
So you might remember we change that to show our particular page.
So we'll just change that back to front page displays.
Latest posts say changes and then we'll do a refresh and we should now see the default Zera if home
page and there we get.
So you can see this might not be the sort of site that we're looking for but if it is we do have something
that looks pretty impressive just from a couple of clicks.
We're going to want to customize the content here.
So let's see how we do that.
We'll get back to appearance and about Zera flight and actions required.
So some themes that come with specific plug ins and this one requests that we install pirate forms which
is a particular form plug in that makes the form set up management process much easier.
So I'm just going to go through the process and activate that particular plug in.
And then let's go back to about Zera flight and see if we've done all the set up steps up we still got
one more thing to go.
So that's actually just check that the contact form is working.
So it will refresh and make sure it looks good
there we go.
It looks really nice if we want to customize that form.
Then once you install a plug in then usually under settings you'll see an option for that new plug in.
So I get to settings and pirate forms and then we can see how to add our form to any page we just use
that code.
This is known as a short code and quite a few plug ins use this.
So square brackets with some words inside to produce some content in this case a form and then we've
got various options.
So if I was going to use this I'd definitely want to change the email address.
There are some other options I can change which fields are displayed and whether or not they required
the labels for those fields.
The messages that will be sent and any S-M T.P. settings if I want to use a particular email server
to send your e-mails.
All right so now that we've set up the pirate forms let's go back to parents and click on customize.
So pretty much everything will have a bunch of options.
And most of those will edit through the Wordpress customize.
Now the great thing about this is that we can see the results of the changes that we make immediately
before they're even published on the site.
So if we click for example site identity then we could upload a logo.
We can change the title and the tag line and we can upload an icon which is what appears in the browser
tab up there.
If we wanted to
OK changing the section order and colors in this case is only available on the pro version of the theme.
And if you like this theme it's well worth buying the prairie version but we'll stick to the free options
for the moment.
So general settings you might want to change these to increase the performance of the sites or the scrolling
behavior or indeed the accessibility and copyright.
We could put whatever we like in there and then it will appear right down there at the bottom.
If we wanted to put the copyright symbol we can use the H Tim L code.
Ampersand copy semi-colon and there it is
OK we can also edit the footer social icons so you could put in your own Facebook Twitter Linked-In
be Hans dribble and Instagram links and if you don't want them to appear if you don't have a dribble
account for example you can just make them blank and then they'll disappear.
We can also change the footer content here so you can add your address the address icon.
And similarly for the email section and the phone number.
Now the special Tref here it's got a TTL in front of it.
And that means that if you click on that on your phone it will actually phone that number.
OK.
So that's the footer options I'm going to speed through the rest of the options.
So here we can edit the title on the home page
something like that.
We can change what those links say
and where they go as well.
We can add extra images to the slide up and if we've got the pro version we can have a background video
here as well.
And then we can edit the particular sections.
So here we've got our focus.
So the title is currently features.
And then you've got a subtitle here.
And again you can edit it live and you can choose to hide that particular section if you want as well.
And you could edit each of these content blocks just by changing the title text where you want the links
to go and the logo image.
That's all pretty straightforward.
The other sections then work in a very similar way.
So we might look at those specifically but we've got the About section which we can edit all of that's
your team section.
Again we can customize that and hide it if we don't want it.
Testimonials as well we can hide that.
And then the latest news is where our blog posts will go.
If we've got any then we've got the contact form.
And then we can change the background image for the contact form section.
And I'm actually going to look at menus and widgets on a separate page so we won't look at those here
and the static front page up just allows us to use our own page rather than this one as the home page
if we want to.
So not all themes will have all of those options.
Some will have different options but all of them will have a customized that allows you to edit colour's
content.
OK.
So we're nearly there with our customizing.
We're going to go back and just look at two more sections in appearance which are going to be relevant
Scarlet's of which theme you're working with.
And the first of those is widgets here.
Now most WordPress themes have two main sections for widgets.
They have a sidebar which isn't actually visible here but other pages may well have it if I click some
sample page for example that will jump to the sample page and you can see the sidebar here.
And they also have a footer along the bottom.
And usually you can edit the sidebar and the footer using widgets.
So here you can see we've got all these widgets in our Sidebar at the top we've got a search bar which
is there and then we've got our recent posts which we can customize and give a particular title to comments
archive's categories et cetera.
So say we didn't want to give a metal section we could just delete that.
And say instead of that we wanted to put some text at the bottom
of our site but
then we can just add a text widget
and put in any HMO we like
let's just have a quick refresh.
There it is.
So there's our text and our text or email.
So if there are custom things that you want to put in the sidebar like log in forms or something like
that.
Then there are plugins to allow you to do that.
But most themes will also come with a set of widgets like the Zera ones here as well.
And then we can do the same thing in the footer So currently the footer section is blank but we could
put an extra widget in there if we like.
And then that will appear in the footer various superbly aligned would have to do a bit of work to make
that look good but you get the idea.
So widgets are how you customize the sidebar and the footer.
And the last major bit of customization you're probably going to want to do is to play around with the
menus.
So some themes will have a number of different menus.
We can see that this one has just a single menu along the top there.
And the nice thing about menus in wordpress is that if we add a new page say just click Add new and
then we might have an About Us page
so I can just create there and publish see how quickly and easy it is to create a new page.
Then not only do we then have that new page but it will automatically appear in the menu up here as
well.
So that's really handy.
But if we want to customize our menus then we can edit that here.
So say for example we don't want the sample page to appear in the menu.
Just remove it there.
We could also change that name that appears or change anything we like about that menu.
We can also create a new menu if we want.
And then it might appear in the footer for example or in the sidebar.
All fairly straightforward.
The last thing I want to show you about appearance is the editor here and we'll leave that page we won't
save our changes.
Now this is where the real coding gets done.
So this is the theme code here which is mostly Page Pate but we've got a lot of styles as well.
And this is where you would edit the theme if you want to do some custom restyling or changing the content
in a way that you can't do using the customize or the widgets.
Be aware though it's easy to break stuff.
So why take a backup of your site before you start editing these files.
All right.
So PC then that had zero cost and just a few minutes of your time you can create a completely custom
site which looks good is robust and is easily editable by someone who doesn't know any code.
Sometimes you're going to find that the free themes either don't offer the exact look that you want
or just a not quite good enough for you to use for a site of your own or make for a client.
And the next stage up from that then are paid things.
And if you're wanting to make a site look really good.
I would go straight to page themes.
There are lots of places to get them but the biggest directory of page themes on line today is theme
forest dot net and they've got a bunch of themes for all sorts of platforms.
But we're particularly interested in the Wordpress ones.
So I pay themes.
Normally around 50 60 dollars.
They're not big money and the amount of time and effort that they'll save you and the higher quality
products that you'll end up with I think they're well worth it.
So if we look as the best sellers and I'll just switch to the great view so we can get more on the screen
than any of these very popular themes are likely to work really well for you.
So if we hover over them then we can get a preview of how they look.
Now the nice thing about the most popular themes is that they tend to have a range of different looks
and styles.
So you buy the theme as a whole but then
you can customize it to such an extent that you could make a whole range of different looking sites
using the same theme.
Bear in mind though you will usually have to buy a separate copy of the theme for each site.
So in short if you want to get good looking WordPress websites up quickly my advice would be to choose
a premium WordPress theme that offers a range of different styles and become an expert in that particular
theme.
That will mean that you can use the various settings options and customization potential really quickly
and get something that looks great up really fast.
And although all of these themes will offer a great experience.
The one that I'm going to work through with you is the X theme.
So let's have a quick look at what the X does like all theme voice themes we can use live preview to
take a look at it in action.
Just remove that frame so we can see the whole thing.
So you can see we've got a great looking site first off but we've got a number of sub themes within
the main theme.
So integrity is the first option which is the more sort of business a looking site.
Renew is another more flat design icon for blogs and online magazines and ethos for more stylish looking
sites like this country living one here.
But where it gets really exciting is when we look at the huge range of demos that are available.
And I'm just going to click just a few of these open them in a browser.
So there are 10 or so demos for each of the main themes.
And each of the themes supports with commerce an online shop which we'll be looking at in a couple of
years time by the press which we saw in the previous video for social networks Web sites and beby press
for forum type sites.
So let's have a quick look at those demos.
There's the integrity one.
It's pretty good.
That was the new theme again looks good but looks completely different.
And then he has the icon theme as well.
So none of those three may be perfect for your particular site.
The chances are you'll find something in here that's pretty close to what you want.
And all of these come with a huge range of content types as well.
So for example if I pick another integrity demo we'll be able to use this slider on any of our sites
and I counter like that's
background images and buttons like this and block layouts like this.
So while the X theme is by no means unique in offering these things I think the overall package is the
most flexible that's available.
And therefore if you're going to become an expert on one particular theme I'd go for the X theme and
that's what we'll be using in the next few videos where we'll be creating and customizing a couple of
completely different sites using the X theme.